In this video, we're going to get really
creative and create a gauge chart.
Creativity can be quite important without
visualizations, because it helps us really
engage our audience or tell a story and
Brono wants to do both in this scenario.
He has some data here showing
different projected sea
level rises depending on how well
the world responds to global warming.
So for example, in the low scenario,
if there's an immediate and
positive response,
waters might only rise by 390 mil.
On the other hand,
if there's very poor response,
our most extreme scenario are sea levels
could rise by nearly 10 meters by 2200.
Now what he wants to do is
to create gauge chart so
that the audience can
interact with this data.
I should probably give you
a bit of a road map so
that you understand some of
the choices we're making.
To create the gauge chart,
we're actually going to use a combination
of a doughnut chart and a pie chart.
We're going to start with a doughnut
chart, which has the first half broken
into three equal segments, and then
the second half made up by one segment,
we're then going to hide
the segment on the left.
And then we're going to rotate the whole
chart through to 270 degrees so
that it looks more like a gauge or
speedometer.
We're then going to superimpose a pie
chart over the top of that, and
the first segment of the pie will
be our global sea level rise.
The second segment, our pointer, and
the third segment, the rest of the pie.
We're then going to hide segment one and
three, to give us our final gauge chart.
Before we can create the chart though,
setting up the data is quite important, so
we're actually going to do this together.
The first thing we need to set
up is the gauge itself, and
this is really entirely up to you.
I would like three equal segments, but
you could decide to go for
a smaller medium and a large.
We then need to make sure that
the second half of the chart that we're
not going to see is the same
size as these combined.
So, I'm just going to hit an auto sum,
and there's my gauge.
The pointer is made up of three sections,
as we saw,
the first segment needs to be
our global sea level rise.
And in your data this might be quite
straightforward, in ours there's a little
bit of a complication because our users
can actually choose their scenario.
So for example intermediate,
I'll actually that on high and
they can choose their year.
So, we actually need to do a two way look
up to determine which value they want.
And you may recall if you
did the previous course,
probably the best way to do a two way
look up is using an index and a match.
So clicking to Q4,
little bit of revision equals, in for
index and then I'll look up data is
going to be all our possible values.
So, I'm just going to highlight
all of that and type comma.
Now the first thing we need to
identify is which row out of
that data set we want
to get our value from.
Now if we have a look high is in the fifth
row, so we need some way of finding out
which position high is in, and
to do that we use our MATCH function.
So, here's our MATCH and
I'm going to match the chosen scenario
into my possible options which I've named.
And this is an exact match,
so 0 close your bracket for
your match, now type another comma.
And we're going to need another match
to workout which column are selected
here is in.
So again MATCH, click on the year 2200 and
we going to match that into our years,
again it's an exact match.
I'm going to close my bracket for
my second match and
my index.
Now let's just do a quick double check, so
for the highest scenario in the year 2200,
I'm expecting to get back 7500 and
there it is.
If I were to go and change my year,
for example to be at 2100,
you can see that immediately
changes to 2000, so that's working.
The next segment is going to
be our pointed self and
this will vary depending
on the size of your data.
I'm going to say let's take a guess at 50,
if it ends up being much too wide or
much too narrow, we can always adjust it.
And then finally we need to make
up the rest of the pie chart.
So, we need to decide what our maximum,
our gauge can go to, and
we're going to keep it
simple by saying it's 9700.
So the first half of the chart is going to
be made up by 9700 less these two values.
And the second half of
the chart will be 9700, so
our total third segment is
going to be equal to 9700
times 2 less the sum of the two
segments we already have.
And then I'm going to click Enter.
So, that's how data is set up,
let's get creative.
I'm going to select my gauge data first,
we just going to stop with the gauge and
I'm going to come to insert,
come to my charts and
I'm going to choose a doughnut chart.
I don't need the legends, so
I'm just going to flick that off.
And then I'm going to come up
to chart design format and
we're going to make a few changes.
I'm going to make this
about a size 16 by 16,
I don't need it to have a shape fill,
so I'm going to set it to no fill.
And I don't need it to have an outline,
so I'll flick that off as well and
then I'm just going to move the chart
into place in the grey section.
Now we can actually get into
changing the chart itself, so
I'm going to click into the chart data and
Ctrl+1 to open up my panel.
And here's one of the most important
things we need to do for this chart,
we need to change the angle
of our first slice.
We're going to make that 270 and
that's how we actually get
that distinctive gauge look, so
a really handy little trick.
And we're going to change our hole sizes
as well, I'm going to make that 50.
Now, clicking into our paint bucket,
we need to turn that white line off,
so I'm going to come to border and
say no line.
And now we're going to recolor
the individual segments, so
I'm going to click on
to the bottom segment.
And I'm going to say no fill, so that's
how we effectively hide half the chart.
Now with the other three segments,
I could just make them a solid color, but
we're trying to do
something a bit different.
So, I'm going to click into the first
segment and I'm going to add a gradient.
This gradient might look different on
your system, it's whatever you used last.
I am actually going to slide my tab
stop on the left over to the far left,
if you have more than two you can just
click on this little remove gradient stop,
to get rid of it.
And there was my gradient stop selected,
I'm going to change it to the pale
yellow from standard colors.
I'm then going to click on to
my second gradient stop and
I'm going to change that
to the pale orange.
And if yours is sitting on the far right,
just pull it in a little bit, and
now we're going to change
the angle of the gradient.
because I actually wanted to go
from pale yellow to orange, and
the easiest way to do that
is to come to direction.
And find the one that looks
closest to what you want, so
I want the yellow to the orange on
a diagonal and it's this option over here.
That's about a 315 degree, and you can
obviously adjust this if you need to,
and then I'm going to click
into my middle segment.
Again gradient, but this time I'm going
to go from the pale orange just slightly
dark orange and I'm going to pull both of
these gradients stops in a little bit.
So, my second gradient stop, I'm going to
click more colors, come to standard and
choose the orange third from the bottom
kind of in the middle and say OK.
And probably for
this one a zero gradient will work nicely.
And then finally clicking
into my last segment,
I'm going to make this
the dark orange to red.
And that's about a 40 degree angle,
should work quite nicely there,
maybe a 30,
fantastic and
there is our really nice looking gauge.
But now we have to actually
get our pointer on to that, so
making sure you've got
your charts selected.
We're going to come up to chart design and
we're going to click select data.
And we're going to add another series,
so we're going to click add and
the series name is going to be Pointer.
And this can come in handy if
you need to modify the chart.
And the series values are going
to be our pointer values, so
I'm just going to select those three and
say OK, OK again.
What it's done is it's added
a second ring to our doughnut,
which is not quite what we want,
so let's click into that ring.
Come up to change chart type and
we We're actually come to change
our pointer to be a pie chart.
And then we're going to put
it on a secondary axis, and
that's the second trick in here.
So make it a pie chart, secondary axis,
say OK, and there's our pie chart.
Very similar to what we had
to do with our gauge chart.
Let's just click into the pie, first of
all, we're going to turn off the border.
We're then going to
come to our Options and
we're going to change the Angle
of first slice to 270.
And now all we need to do is come
back to our paint bucket icon,
click on our first segment and
say No fill.
Click on our third segment and
say No fill and there's a gauge chart.
But let's make our point
at slightly nicer colors,
just make sure you've got a selected,
and we're going to make that black.
We should probably give
our chart a nice title,
so I'm going to come into chart title and
we can call this Projected rise in GMSL.
But now there's one little
thing left I'd like to do.
It's not totally obvious from looking at
this pointer what the actual value is.
So probably a good idea to actually
put out data labels on, but
this is also going to require
a little bit of jiggery-pokery.
So just click somewhere onto
pie charts as selected and
we're going to turn on data labels.
But as you would expect, it's actually
labelled the first segment with
the 2,000 and the pointer with the 50,
which is not what we want.
So just click on one of your labels so
they highlight it, and
we're going to come into our Format
data labels, Expand label options, and
we're not going to show the value.
Instead were going to get value from
cells, so tick that first option and
we're now going to select and
this will seem weird, our Q3 down Q5.
So basically I'm saying that the first
segment gets the word pointer,
the second segment gets the 2,000.
And that's the trick to this.
And then I'm going to say OK.
Now, of course we don't actually want to
see those other two labels, so I'm just
going to click on the first one and delete
and click on the second one and delete.
If we then decided we needed to see the
millimeters as well, because we haven't
put that in our chart title, we can
always use our custom number formats.
Clicking onto our value in spreadsheet,
I'm going to come up to Number format,
I'm going to come to Custom.
It's going to be naught
followed by mm in a quotes.
And when we say OK,
it changes it in the spreadsheet,
and of course it changes it on the chart.
We can now use this visualization to
come to our drop down list an actually
have a look at what read we will get for
different years and scenarios.
But, Taken that one step further and
actually added Animation.
So, similar to what we had before and
you can look at the code if you want to,
we've got a Reset button which
we'll set it back to 2010.
And we've gotten Animate button,
which will walk us through how sea
levels will rise for that scenario.
So hopefully this has
stimulated your creativity and
we really look forward to seeing some of
the charts that you are now creating.
Don't forget to go and put your ideas
in this week's creative corner.